I ............. y w J^i-J1 . J^ J^ RESOLUTION . F THE EXECUTIVE BOARD OF THE WHO RÉSOLUTION DU CONSEIL EXÉCUTIF DE L'OMS ......... ............... ........ ... RESOLUCION DEL CONSEJO EJECUTIVO DE LA OMS Sixty-ninth Session EB69.R9 22 January 1982 ACTION IN RESPECT OF INTERNATIONAL CONVENTIONS ON NARCOTIC AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES The Executive Board, Having examined the reports of the Director-General,^ and appreciating the work done; Recognizing the responsibility assigned to WHO by the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, as amended by the 1972 Protocol, and the Convention on Psychotropic Substances, 1971; Recognizing the objective manner in which WHO has fulfilled its important role in making recommendations on international control of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances under the Conventions; Wishing the Executive Board to be kept fully informed of the activities of WHO in regard to this important function; 1. REQUESTS the Director-General: (1) to continue to work with the Secretary-General of the United Nations to devise methods of informing governments in an effective way about the forthcoming activities of WHO in connexion with its obligations under the Conventions (concerning its recommendations on scheduling, rescheduling, descheduling, and the handling of exemptions from control), and to invite governments both to provide data and documentation summarizing their experiences with the substances under review and to make their views on medical and scientific matters available to WHO; (2) to continue to provide drug manufacturers and other interested parties with appropriate opportunity to make written and oral presentations on medical and scientific matters to WHO concerning drugs for possible control under the Conventions; (3) to continue to convey to the United Nations as soon as possible after completion of the work of the review group a full assessment of the substance for any formal WHO recommendation for international control; (4) to report annually to the Executive Board regarding any activities of WHO in respect of the Conventions, including the Organization's plans to review drugs and recommendations it has made concerning control, and to make available to the Executive Board the reports of the review group; (5) to intensify efforts aimed at improving prescription, delivery and utilization practices regarding psychoactive drugs, through educational programmes for physicians and other health workers, and other measures, seeking the cooperation of medical educational institutions, medical associations, the pharmaceutical industry and others in this endeavour;  ^Documents EB69/21, EB69/21 Corr.1 and EB69/21 Add.1. EB69.R9 page 2 (6) to pay special attention to the further strengthening of cooperation in this respect with the developing countries, where facilities are limited and urgent action is needed; (7) to intensify cooperation with Member States in drafting national legislation concerning drugs covered by the Conventions; 2. URGES Member States which have not yet done so to become Parties to the Conventions at the earliest possible time; 3. URGES Member States, drug manufacturers and other interested parties to give full cooperation and support to WHO in its efforts to fulfil its obligations under the Conventions. Seventeenth meeting, 22 January 1982 EB69/SR/17 