THIRTY-THIRD WORLD HEALTH ASSEMBLY WHA33.27 23 May 1980 ACTION IN RESPECT OF INTERNATIONAL CONVENTIONS ON NARCOTIC AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES. ABUSE OF NARCOTIC AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES The Thirty-third World Health Assembly, Acknowledging the role and responsibilities of WHO in relation to the abuse of narcotic and psychotropic substances. Noting reports concerning the growing incidence of abuse of heroin and other opiates, cocaine, coca paste, cannabis, barbiturates and non-barbiturate sedative hypnotics, tranquillizers, and other psychoactive drugs. Noting the increase in drug-related deaths, particularly as a result of overdoses, combinations of drugs with other drugs and with alcohol, and dangerous impurities. the increasing drug abuse especially among young people and women. and the severe health and social problems related to its abuse. Recognizing that drug abuse is a serious obstacle to socioeconomic progress and has a particularly negative impact on public health. Reaffirming resolutions WHA26.52 and WHA28.80 concerning, respectively, the epidemiology of drug dependence and the need for programmes of prevention, treatment and rehabilitation in the field of drug dependence at the community level. Noting with appreciation the work done by WHO in cooperation with the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control, in particular regarding epidemiological research and reporting, the holding of seminars on the safe use of psychotropic and narcotic substances, and the convening of an expert committee on the assessment of untoward consequences for public health of drug dependence and abuse. Having noted the request of the United Nations General Assembly in resolution 32/l24 (1977) that, in the effort to reduce drug abuse, WHO and other appropriate agencies and bodies of the United Nations design models for prevention, treatment and rehabilitation. Acknowledging United Nations General Assembly resolution 34/177 (1979), urging greater action by WHO and other United Nations agencies to implement drug abuse control programmes within their mandates, and requesting that they make drug abuse control a regular item on the agendas of their governing bodies. 1. AFFIRMS that drug abuse constitutes a serious health hazard of steadily growing proportions in developing nations as well as industrialized countries. 2. URGES Member States to devote more attention to the incidence of drug abuse in their own societies, their regions and the world community, and particularly to the disruptive effect that drug abuse has on the lives and future careers of young people, to its negative impact on socioeconomic well-being, to the increasing difficulties in enforcing the law, and to measures aimed at reducing the incidence of illicit supply of drugs of abuse in their societies.WHA33.27 page 2 3. ENCOURAGES Member States, as they develop their national strategies for health for all by the year 2000. and their biennial programmes of cooperation with WHO, to give serious con.sideration to the inclusion of components that can deal effectively with the growing incidence of drug abuse. 4. INVITES Member States to make voluntary contributions to support work in the field of drug abuse control by WHO and other international bodies, particularly the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control. 5. URGES Member States that have not done so to become parties to the international drug control treaties as soon as possible. 6. RECOMMENDS that WHO continue to assess the impact of primary health care on the reduction of local dependence on opium as a panacea, particularly in opium-producing countries. 1¥ REQUESTS the Director-General: (1) to foster the collection, processing and dissemination through publication and other means of information relating to the detrimental effects of drug abuse on health and social development. (2) to collaborate with Member States in integrating drug abuse control into their primary health care programmes and national strategies for health for all by the year 2000. (3) to promote the initiation and strengthening of national and international programmes for the assessment9 scheduling, control and appropriate use of narcotic and psychotropic substances, including those of plant origin, and to support such programmes by the development of appropriate guidelines in consultation with the United Nations Division of Narcotic Drugs, International Narcotics Control Board and other United Nations organs concerned. (4) to seek additional funds from multilateral, governmental and nongovernmental sources for the support of new projects and WHO programmes in drug abuse control. (5) to further develop activities concerned with the prevention and control of health problems related to human behaviour, such as those linked to drug abuse. (6) to maintain WHO's capacity to deal with this pressing health issue. (7) to strengthen the coordination between the WHO programmes relating to narcotic and psychotropic substances, those dealing with drug policy and management, and other related programmes, and to strengthen collaboration with interested nongovernmental organizations. (8) to report to the Health Assembly whenever appropriate on progress in implementing the provisions of this resolution. Seventeenth plenary meeting, 23 May 1980 A33/VR/17 