  IV. GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS ADOPTED BY THE COMMITTEE ON THE ELIMINATION OF  DISCRIMINATION AGAINST WOMEN Eleventh session (1992)** **  Contained in document A/47/38. General recommendation No. 19:  Violence against women Background 1. Gender-based violence is a form of discrimination that seriously inhibits women’s ability to enjoy rights and freedoms on a basis of equality with men. 2. In 1989, the Committee recommended that States should include in their reports information on violence and on measures introduced to deal with it (General recommendation 12, Eighth session). 3. At its tenth session in 1991, it was decided to allocate part of the eleventh session to a discussion and study on article 6 and other articles of the Convention relating to violence towards women and the sexual harassment and exploitation of women.  That subject was chosen in anticipation of the 1993 World Conference on Human Rights, convened by the General Assembly by its resolution 45/155 of 18 December 1990. 4. The Committee concluded that not all the reports of States parties adequately reflected the close connection between discrimination against women, gender-based violence, and violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms.  The full implementation of the Convention required States to take positive measures to eliminate all forms of violence against women. 5. The Committee suggested to States parties that in reviewing their laws and policies, and in reporting under the Convention, they should have regard to the following comments of the Committee concerning gender-based violence. General comments 6. The Convention in article 1 defines discrimination against women.  The definition of discrimination includes gender-based violence, that is, violence that is directed against a woman because she is a woman or that affects women disproportionately.  It includes acts that inflict physical, mental or sexual harm or suffering, threats of such acts, coercion and other deprivations of liberty.  Gender-based violence may breach specific provisions of the Convention, regardless of whether those provisions expressly mention violence. 7. Gender-based violence, which impairs or nullifies the enjoyment by women of human rights and fundamental freedoms under general international law or under human rights conventions, is discrimination within the meaning of article 1 of the Convention.  These rights and freedoms include:  (a) The right to life;  (b) The right not to be subject to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;  (c) The right to equal protection according to humanitarian norms in time of international or internal armed conflict;  (d) The right to liberty and security of person;  (e) The right to equal protection under the law;  (f) The right to equality in the family;  (g) The right to the highest standard attainable of physical and mental health;  (h) The right to just and favourable conditions of work. 8. The Convention applies to violence perpetrated by public authorities.  Such acts of violence may breach that State’s obligations under general international human rights law and under other conventions, in addition to breaching this Convention. 9. It is emphasized, however, that discrimination under the Convention is not restricted to action by or on behalf of Governments (see articles 2 (e), 2 (f) and 5).  For example, under article 2 (e) the Convention calls on States parties to take all appropriate measures to eliminate discrimination against women by any person, organization or enterprise.  Under general international law and specific human rights covenants, States may also be responsible for private acts if they fail to act with due diligence to prevent violations of rights or to investigate and punish acts of violence, and for providing compensation. Comments on specific articles of the Convention Articles 2 and 3 10. Articles 2 and 3 establish a comprehensive obligation to eliminate discrimination in all its forms in addition to the specific obligations under articles 5-16. Articles 2 (f), 5 and 10 (c) 11. Traditional attitudes by which women are regarded as subordinate to men or as having stereotyped roles perpetuate widespread practices involving violence or coercion, such as family violence and abuse, forced marriage, dowry deaths, acid attacks and female circumcision.  Such prejudices and practices may justify gender-based violence as a form of protection or control of women.  The effect of such violence on the physical and mental integrity of women is to deprive them of the equal enjoyment, exercise and knowledge of human rights and fundamental freedoms.  While this comment addresses mainly actual or threatened violence the underlying consequences of these forms of gender-based violence help to maintain women in subordinate roles and contribute to their low level of political participation and to their lower level of education, skills and work opportunities. 12. These attitudes also contribute to the propagation of pornography and the depiction and other commercial exploitation of women as sexual objects, rather than as individuals.  This in turn contributes to gender-based violence. Article 6 13. States parties are required by article 6 to take measures to suppress all forms of traffic in women and exploitation of the prostitution of women. 14. Poverty and unemployment increase opportunities for trafficking in women.  In addition to established forms of trafficking there are new forms of sexual exploitation, such as sex tourism, the recruitment of domestic labour from developing countries to work in developed countries, and organized marriages between women from developing countries and foreign nationals.  These practices are incompatible with the equal enjoyment of rights by women and with respect for their rights and dignity.  They put women at special risk of violence and abuse. 15. Poverty and unemployment force many women, including young girls, into prostitution.  Prostitutes are especially vulnerable to violence because their status, which may be unlawful, tends to marginalize them.  They need the equal protection of laws against rape and other forms of violence. 16. Wars, armed conflicts and the occupation of territories often lead to increased prostitution, trafficking in women and sexual assault of women, which require specific protective and punitive measures. Article 11 17. Equality in employment can be seriously impaired when women are subjected to gender-specific violence, such as sexual harassment in the workplace. 18. Sexual harassment includes such unwelcome sexually determined behaviour as physical contact and advances, sexually coloured remarks, showing pornography and sexual demands, whether by words or actions.  Such conduct can be humiliating and may constitute a health and safety problem; it is discriminatory when the woman has reasonable ground to believe that her objection would disadvantage her in connection with her employment, including recruitment or promotion, or when it creates a hostile working environment. Article 12 19. States parties are required by article 12 to take measures to ensure equal access to health care.  Violence against women puts their health and lives at risk. 20. In some States there are traditional practices perpetuated by culture and tradition that are harmful to the health of women and children.  These practices include dietary restrictions for pregnant women, preference for male children and female circumcision or genital mutilation. Article 14 21. Rural women are at risk of gender-based violence because of traditional attitudes regarding the subordinate role of women that persist in many rural communities.  Girls from rural communities are at special risk of violence and sexual exploitation when they leave the rural community to seek employment in towns. Article 16 (and article 5) 22. Compulsory sterilization or abortion adversely affects women’s physical and mental health, and infringes the right of women to decide on the number and spacing of their children. 23. Family violence is one of the most insidious forms of violence against women.  It is prevalent in all societies.  Within family relationships women of all ages are subjected to violence of all kinds, including battering, rape, other forms of sexual assault, mental and other forms of violence, which are perpetuated by traditional attitudes.  Lack of economic independence forces many women to stay in violent relationships.  The abrogation of their family responsibilities by men can be a form of violence, and coercion.  These forms of violence put women’s health at risk and impair their ability to participate in family life and public life on a basis of equality. Specific recommendations 24. In light of these comments, the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women recommends:  (a) States parties should take appropriate and effective measures to overcome all forms of gender-based violence, whether by public or private act;  (b) States parties should ensure that laws against family violence and abuse, rape, sexual assault and other gender-based violence give adequate protection to all women, and respect their integrity and dignity.  Appropriate protective and support services should be provided for victims.  Gender-sensitive training of judicial and law enforcement officers and other public officials is essential for the effective implementation of the Convention;  (c) States parties should encourage the compilation of statistics and research on the extent, causes and effects of violence, and on the effectiveness of measures to prevent and deal with violence;  (d) Effective measures should be taken to ensure that the media respect and promote respect for women;  (e) States parties in their report should identify the nature and extent of attitudes, customs and practices that perpetuate violence against women, and the kinds of violence that result.  They should report the measures that they have undertaken to overcome violence, and the effect of those measures;  (f) Effective measures should be taken to overcome these attitudes and practices.  States should introduce education and public information programmes to help eliminate prejudices which hinder women’s equality (recommendation No. 3, 1987);  (g) Specific preventive and punitive measures are necessary to overcome trafficking and sexual exploitation;  (h) States parties in their reports should describe the extent of all these problems and the measures, including penal provisions, preventive and rehabilitation measures, that have been taken to protect women engaged in prostitution or subject to trafficking and other forms of sexual exploitation.  The effectiveness of these measures should also be described;  (i) Effective complaints procedures and remedies, including compensation, should be provided;  (j) States parties should include in their reports information on sexual harassment, and on measures to protect women from sexual harassment and other forms of violence of coercion in the workplace;  (k) States parties should establish or support services for victims of family violence, rape, sex assault and other forms of gender-based violence, including refuges, specially trained health workers, rehabilitation and counselling;  (l) States parties should take measures to overcome such practices and should take account of the Committee’s recommendation on female circumcision (recommendation No. 14) in reporting on health issues;  (m) States parties should ensure that measures are taken to prevent coercion in regard to fertility and reproduction, and to ensure that women are not forced to seek unsafe medical procedures such as illegal abortion because of lack of appropriate services in regard to fertility control;  (n) States parties in their reports should state the extent of these problems and should indicate the measures that have been taken and their effect;  (o) States parties should ensure that services for victims of violence are accessible to rural women and that where necessary special services are provided to isolated communities;  (p) Measures to protect them from violence should include training and employment opportunities and the monitoring of the employment conditions of domestic workers;  (q) States parties should report on the risks to rural women, the extent and nature of violence and abuse to which they are subject, their need for and access to support and other services and the effectiveness of measures to overcome violence;  (r) Measures that are necessary to overcome family violence should include: Criminal penalties where necessary and civil remedies in case of domestic violence; Legislation to remove the defence of honour in regard to the assault or murder of a female family member; Services to ensure the safety and security of victims of family violence, including refuges, counselling and rehabilitation programmes; Rehabilitation programmes for perpetrators of domestic violence; Support services for families where incest or sexual abuse has occurred;  (s) States parties should report on the extent of domestic violence and sexual abuse, and on the preventive, punitive and remedial measures that have been taken;  (t) That States parties should take all legal and other measures that are necessary to provide effective protection of women against gender-based violence, including, inter alia: Effective legal measures, including penal sanctions, civil remedies compensatory provisions to protect women against all kinds of violence, including, inter alia, violence and abuse in the family, sexual assault and sexual harassment in the workplace; Preventive measures, including public information and education programmes to change attitudes concerning the roles and status of men and women; Protective measures, including refuges, counselling, rehabilitation and support services for women who are the victims of violence or who are at risk of violence;  (u) That States parties should report on all forms of gender-based violence, and that such reports should include all available data on the incidence of each form of violence, and on the effects of such violence on the women who are victims;  (v) That the reports of States parties should include information on the legal, preventive and protective measures that have been taken to overcome violence against women, and on the effectiveness of such measures.     