United Nations A/RES/57/167 Distr.: General General Assembly 16 January 2003 Fifty-seventh session Agenda item 99 Resolution adopted by the General Assembly [on the report of the Third Committee (A/57/546)] 57/167. Follow-up to the Second World Assembly on Ageing The General Assembly, Recalling its resolutions 54/24 of 10 November 1999, 54/262 of 25 May 2000, 56/118 of 19 December 2001 and 56/228 of 24 December 2001, Reaffirming the principles and recommendations of the International Plan of Action on Ageing,1 which it endorsed in its resolution 37/51 of 3 December 1982, and the United Nations Principles for Older Persons, adopted by the General Assembly in 1991,2 which provided guidance in areas of independence, participation, care, self-fulfilment and dignity, Having considered the report of the Second World Assembly on Ageing, held in Madrid from 8 to 12 April 2002,3 Expressing its profound gratitude to the Government and the people of Spain for hosting the World Assembly and for the hospitality extended to all participants, 1. Welcomes the report of the Second World Assembly on Ageing;3 2. Endorses the Political Declaration and the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing, 2002, adopted by consensus by the Second World Assembly on Ageing on 12 April 2002;4 3. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;5 4. Calls upon Governments, the United Nations system and all other actors to take the necessary steps to implement the Madrid Plan of Action; 5. Recognizes that the evolving process of global ageing requires actions at all levels on the three priority directions in the Madrid Plan of Action, namely, older 1 See Report of the World Assembly on Ageing, Vienna, 26 July–6 August 1982 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.82.I.16), chap. VI, sect. A. 2 Resolution 46/91, annex. 3 Report of the Second World Assembly on Ageing, Madrid, 8–12 April 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.IV.4). 4 Ibid., chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II. 5 A/57/93. 02 54921 A/RES/57/167 persons and development, advancing health and well-being into old age, and ensuring enabling and supportive environments; 6. Affirms the aim of the Madrid Plan of Action, which is to ensure that persons everywhere are able to age with security and dignity and to continue to participate in their societies as citizens with full rights; 7. Recognizes that progress made in the implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action should be contingent upon effective partnership among Governments, all parts of civil society and the private sector, as well as an enabling environment based, inter alia, on democracy, the rule of law, respect for all human rights, fundamental freedoms and good governance at all levels, including the national and international levels; 8. Reaffirms that enhanced international cooperation is an essential complement to national efforts to implement fully the Madrid Plan of Action, and therefore encourages the international community further to promote cooperation among all actors involved; 9. Invites international financial institutions and regional development banks to examine and adjust their lending and grants practices so as to ensure that older persons are recognized as a development resource and are taken into account in their policies and projects as part of efforts to assist developing countries and countries with economies in transition in the implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action; 10. Welcomes the active participation of civil society, the private sector and other relevant actors in the Second World Assembly on Ageing and their support for the implementation of the Political Declaration and the Madrid Plan of Action, as well as the contributions made through parallel events organized by the Government of Spain, and urges relevant actors to continue research efforts in support of the Plan; 11. Requests the Secretary-General to consider the necessary measures to improve the institutional capacity of the United Nations system to fulfil its responsibilities for the implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action, including, inter alia, the maintenance and strengthening of focal points on ageing in the light of the range of tasks called for in the Plan; 12. Also requests the Secretary-General, in the context of the preparation of the programme budget for the biennium 2004–2005, to allocate sufficient human and financial resources to the Programme on Ageing of the Division for Social Policy and Development of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat so as to make it possible for the Programme efficiently and effectively to fulfil its task as the United Nations focal point on ageing and to facilitate and promote the Madrid Plan of Action by, inter alia, designing guidelines for policy development and implementation and advocating means to mainstream ageing issues into development agendas; 13. Welcomes the initiatives of the regional commissions to review the objectives and recommendations of the Madrid Plan of Action, with a view of translating it into regional plans of action, and to assist national institutions, upon request, in implementing and monitoring their actions on ageing; 14. Invites the Commission for Social Development, as the entity responsible for the follow-up to and appraisal of the implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action, to consider integrating the different dimensions of population ageing as A/RES/57/167 contained in the Plan in its work and to consider the modalities for reviews and appraisals at its forty-first session in 2003; 15. Welcomes the preparation of a road map for the implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action by the Programme on Ageing, and invites all relevant actors to contribute to its preparation; 16. Urges all Member States and other actors to contribute generously to the United Nations Trust Fund for Ageing and to support activities undertaken in follow-up to the Second World Assembly on Ageing, including technical cooperation to promote the implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action; 17. Requests the Secretary-General to disseminate the Political Declaration and the Madrid Plan of Action as widely as possible, including among all relevant organs of the United Nations system; 18. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session on the implementation of the present resolution. 77th plenary meeting 18 December 2002 