Implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the ChildCommission on Human Rights resolution 1993/78	The Commission on Human Rights,	Recalling General Assembly resolution 47/112 of 16 December 1992 and its own resolution 1992/75 of 5 March 1992,	Reaffirming that the rights of children require special protection and call for continuous improvement of their situation all over the world, as well as for their development and education in conditions of peace and security,	Profoundly concerned that the situation of children in many parts of the world remains critical as a result of inadequate social conditions, natural disasters, armed conflicts, exploitation, illiteracy, hunger and disability, and convinced that urgent and effective national and international action is called for,	Mindful of the important role of the United Nations Children's Fund and of the United Nations in promoting the well-being of children and their development,	Convinced that the Convention on the Rights of the Child, as a standard-setting accomplishment of the United Nations in the field of human rights, makes a positive contribution to protecting the rights of children and ensuring their well-being,	Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the status of the Convention on the Rights of the Child (E/CN.4/1993/65),	Encouraged by the fact that an unprecedented number of States have to date become signatories and parties to the Convention, thereby demonstrating the widespread commitment that exists to strive for the promotion and protection of the rights of the child,	1.	Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on the status of the Convention on the Rights of the Child;	2.	Expresses its satisfaction at the number of States that have signed, ratified or acceded to the Convention since it was opened for signature, ratification and accession on 26 January 1990;	3.	Calls upon all States that have not done so to sign, ratify or accede to the Convention as a matter of priority;	4.	Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide all facilities and assistance necessary for the dissemination of information on the Convention and its implementation with a view to promoting further ratification of or accession to the Convention, as well as to promote the full realization of its principles and provisions;	5.	Expresses its alarm at persistent reports that massive violations of the rights of the child continue worldwide;	6.	Urges States parties to take immediate steps to ensure strict compliance with their obligations under the Convention;	7.	Appeals again to States parties to the Convention that have made reservations to review the compatibility of their reservations with article 51 of the Convention and other relevant rules of international law;	8.	Recognizes the important functions of the Committee on the Rights of the Child in overseeing the effective implementation of the provisions of the Convention;	9.	Welcomes the constructive and useful results achieved by the Committee on the Rights of the Child during its first three sessions;	10.	Takes note of the consideration by the Committee during its third session of the first reports of States parties;	11.	Welcomes the decision of the Committee at its second session to consider the reservations and declarations entered by States parties to the Convention when examining the reports of the States parties, with a view to encouraging the withdrawal of those reservations and declarations no longer considered necessary;	12.	Also welcomes the decision of the Committee at its third session to recommend that the General Assembly initiate a study, in accordance with article 45 (c) of the Convention, on children in armed conflicts;	13.	Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure the provision of appropriate staff and facilities for the effective performance of the functions of the Committee on the Rights of the Child;	14.	Welcomes General Assembly resolution 47/112, in which the Assembly approved the recommendation of the meeting of the States parties to the Convention on 11 November 1992 regarding the organization of the work of the Committee and the establishment of a pre-sessional working group;	15.	Expresses concern at the increasingly heavy workload of the Committee on the Rights of the Child and the resulting difficulties faced by it in the fulfilment of its functions;	16.	Takes note with interest of the methods of work established by the Committee on the Rights of the Child, including the adoption of an urgent action procedure;	17.	Invites bodies and organizations of the United Nations system, as well as intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, to intensify their efforts with a view to disseminating information on the Convention and promoting its understanding;	18.	Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the status of the Convention on the Rights of the Child to the Commission at its fiftieth session;	19.	Decides to consider the report of the Secretary-General at its fiftieth session under the agenda item "Rights of the child".67th meeting10 March 1993[Adopted without a vote.]OFFICE OF THE HIGH COMMISSIONER  FOR HUMAN RIGHTS