Distr.: General Economic and Social Council 16 October 2013 Substantive session of 2013 Agenda item 14 (b) Resolution adopted by the Economic and Social Council on 25 July 2013 [on the recommendation of the Commission for Social Development (E/2013/26)] 2013/28. Mainstreaming disability in the development agenda: towards 2015 and beyond The Economic and Social Council, Recalling the outcomes of the World Summit for Social Development, held in Copenhagen from 6 to 12 March 1995,1 and of the twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly, entitled “World Summit for Social Development and beyond: achieving social development for all in a globalizing world”, held in Geneva from 26 June to 1 July 2000,2 Reaffirming the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, 3 adopted on 13 December 2006, as a landmark convention affirming the human rights and fundamental freedoms of persons with disabilities, and recognizing that it is both a human rights treaty and a development tool, Recalling earlier operational frameworks, such as the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons4 and the Standard Rules on the Equalization of Opportunities for Persons with Disabilities,5 in which persons with disabilities are recognized as both development agents and beneficiaries in all aspects of development, Convinced that addressing the profound social, cultural and economic disadvantage and exclusion experienced by many persons with disabilities, promoting the use of universal design, as appropriate, as well as the progressive removal of barriers to the full and effective participation of persons with disabilities in all aspects of development, and promoting the equal enjoyment by persons with disabilities of civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights will further the 1 Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II. 2 General Assembly resolution S-24/2, annex. 3 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910. 4 A/37/351/Add.1 and Corr.1, annex, sect. VIII, recommendation 1 (IV). 5 General Assembly resolution 48/96, annex. 13-43498 Please recycle *1343498* E/RES/2013/28 Mainstreaming disability in the development agenda: towards 2015 and beyond equalization of opportunities and contribute to the realization of a “society for all” in the twenty-first century, Noting that, in its resolution 67/226 of 21 December 2012 on the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development of the United Nations system, the General Assembly requested the United Nations development system to take into account the needs of persons with disabilities in its operational activities for development, including in the United Nations Development Assistance Framework, and to address the continuing lack of adequate and reliable information on disability and to strengthen coherence and coordination across the United Nations system in this regard, Welcoming the holding of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on 23 September 2013, with the overarching theme “The way forward: a disability-inclusive development agenda towards 2015 and beyond”, in order to strengthen efforts to ensure accessibility for and inclusion of persons with disabilities in all aspects of development, and looking forward to the contribution its outcome document could make in mainstreaming the rights of persons with disabilities in the post-2015 development agenda, Welcoming also the fact that, since the opening for signature on 30 March 2007 of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional Protocol thereto,6 154 States and 1 regional integration organization have signed and 127 States have ratified or acceded to and 1 regional integration organization has formally confirmed the Convention and 91 States have signed and 76 States have ratified or acceded to the Optional Protocol, and encouraging all States that have not yet done so to consider signing and ratifying the Convention and the Optional Protocol, Noting that the Convention provides comprehensive coverage of the civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights of persons with disabilities, Noting also that persons with disabilities, who face a greater risk of living in absolute poverty, make up an estimated 15 per cent of the world’s population,7 of whom 80 per cent live in developing countries,8 and recognizing the importance of international cooperation in supporting national efforts to mainstream disability in the development agenda, in particular for developing countries, Noting further that, while progress has already been made by Governments, the international community and the United Nations system in mainstreaming disability as an integral part of the global development agenda, major challenges remain, 1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General;9 2. Welcomes the work of the Special Rapporteur on disability of the Commission for Social Development, including his efforts towards the 6 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2518, No. 44910. 7 According to the World Report on Disability, published in 2011 by the World Health Organization and the World Bank, an estimated 15 per cent of the world’s population lives with a disability. 8 In General Assembly resolution 65/186 it is stated that persons with disabilities make up an estimated 10 per cent of the world’s population, of whom 80 per cent live in developing countries. The figure of 80 per cent, which originated from the United Nations Development Programme, was quoted in a discussion paper entitled “Disability and poverty: a survey of World Bank poverty assessments and implications” (Jeanine Braithwaite and Daniel Mont, SP discussion paper No. 0805, World Bank, February 2008). 9 E/CN.5/2013/9. Mainstreaming disability in the development agenda: towards 2015 and beyond E/RES/2013/28 establishment of an African Disability Forum, takes note of his report, 10 and encourages him, in accordance with his mandate, to expand attention to all regions; 3. Encourages the international community to seize every opportunity to include disability as a cross-cutting issue in the global development agenda and to give due consideration to disability in the emerging post-2015 United Nations development agenda as well as in the implementation of the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development of the United Nations system; 4. Encourages Member States and other stakeholders to support the objectives of the United Nations Partnership to Promote the Rights of Persons with Disabilities trust fund, including by providing voluntary contributions; 5. Calls upon Member States, relevant regional organizations and United Nations bodies and agencies to include disability issues, persons with disabilities and the rights of persons with disabilities in their efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals and, in reviewing progress towards the achievement of the Goals, to assess the extent to which persons with disabilities have benefited from those efforts; 6. Looks forward to a successful outcome of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly, and encourages the United Nations system, in collaboration with Member States and civil society organizations, in particular organizations of persons with disabilities and other stakeholders, to take a coordinated approach to its implementation; 7. Encourages Member States, regional commissions and regional organizations to include, as appropriate, the perspectives of men, women and children with disabilities in development cooperation and national development priorities; 8. Reaffirms that each Member State has the primary responsibility for its own economic and social development, including the design and implementation of programmes related to persons with disabilities; 9. Encourages all Member States and, as appropriate, concerned intergovernmental organizations, international and regional organizations, civil society, in particular organizations of persons with disabilities, and the private sector to engage in cooperative arrangements and strategic partnerships to facilitate technical cooperation to advance disability-inclusive development; 10. Encourages the mobilization of resources on a sustainable basis to mainstream disability in development at all levels, and in this regard underlines the need to promote and strengthen international cooperation, including South-South and triangular cooperation, in support of national efforts, including, as appropriate, through the establishment of national mechanisms, in particular in developing countries; 11. Emphasizes the need for international cooperation for mainstreaming disability, and in this regard calls for the strengthening of technical cooperation, including training, exchange of experiences and expertise, transfer of knowledge and technical assistance for capacity-building, which involves strengthening institutional capacities, including planning, management, monitoring and evaluation capacities; 10 See E/CN.5/2013/10. E/RES/2013/28 Mainstreaming disability in the development agenda: towards 2015 and beyond 12. Urges the United Nations to enhance partnerships for international cooperation between the United Nations system and regional and subregional organizations and to enhance its role in forging partnerships with a wide range of stakeholders, in particular with Member States, organizations of persons with disabilities and the private sector, to provide opportunities and forums, within existing resources, for promoting linkages between disability and the mainstream development agenda; 13. Encourages Member States, the United Nations system, within its existing resources, and other stakeholders to improve data and statistics on disability, taking into account existing guidelines published by the United Nations, as a basis for enhancing evidence-based policymaking and to share good practices and experiences in order to overcome barriers and further advance disability-inclusive development; 14. Emphasizes the need for measures to ensure that women and girls with disabilities are not subject to multiple or aggravated forms of discrimination or excluded from participation in the implementation of the internationally agreed development goals, and the need to eliminate the existing inequality of opportunity encountered by women with disabilities; 15. Underlines the importance of closely consulting with and actively involving persons with disabilities, through their representative organizations, in the elaboration of the emerging post-2015 United Nations development agenda; 16. Encourages Governments, intergovernmental organizations, non.governmental organizations and the private sector to continue to contribute to the United Nations Voluntary Fund on Disability in order to support the activities of the Special Rapporteur on disability to promote the equalization of opportunities by, for and with persons with disabilities; 17. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit to the Commission at its fifty-second session an annual report on his activities on mainstreaming disability in the development agenda; 18. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a report on the implementation of the present resolution for submission to the Commission at its fifty-second session. 47th plenary meeting 25 July 2013 