CONVENTION FOR THE PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS AND FUNDAMENTAL FREEDOMS AND PROTOCOL The Governments signatory hereto, being Members of the Council of Europe, Considering the Universal Declaration of Human Rights proclaimed by the General Assembly of the United Nations on 10th December 1948 ; Considering that this Declaration aims at securing the universal and effective recognition and observance of the Rights therein declared ; Considering that the aim of the Council of Europe is the achievement of greater unity between its Members and that one of the methods by which that aim is to be pursued is the maintenance and further realisation of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ; Reaffirming their profound belief in those Fundamental Freedoms which are the foundation of justice and peace in the world and are best maintained on the one hand by an effective political democracy and on the other by a common understanding and observance of the Human Rights upon which they depend ; Being resolved, as the Governments of European countries which are like.minded and have a common heritage of political traditions, ideals, freedom and the rule of law, to take the first steps for.the collective enforcement of certain of the Rights stated in the Universal Declaration ; Have agreed as follows : Article 1 The High Contracting Parties shall secure to everyone within their jurisdiction the rights and freedoms defined in Section I of this Convention. 
SECTION I Article 2 (1) Everyone's right to life shall be protected by law. No one shall be deprived of his life intentionally save in the execution of a sentence of a court following his conviction of a crime for which this penalty is provided by law. (2) Deprivation of life shall not be regarded as inflicted in contravention of this Article when it results from the 1180 of force which is no more than absolutely necessary: (a) in defence of any person from unlawful violence; (b) in order to effect a lawful arrest or to prevent the escape of a person 1awfully detained ; (c) in action lawfully taken for the purpose of quelling a riot or insurrection. 
Article 3 No one shall beá subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. 
Article 4 (1) No one shall be held in slavery or servitude. (2) No one shall be required to perform forced or compulsory labour. (3) For the purpose of this Article the term " forced or compulsory labour " shall not include : (a) any work required to be done in the ordinary course of detention imposed according to the provisions of Article 5 of this Convention or during conditional release from such detention ; (~) any service of a military character or, in caae of conscientious object.ors in countries where they are recognised, service exacted instead of compulsory military service ; (o) any service exacted in case of an emergency or calamity threaten.ing the life or well-being of the community; (d) any work or service which forms part of normal civic obligations. Article 5 (1) Everyone has the right to liberty and security of person. No one shall be deprived of his liberty save in the following cases and in accordance with a procedure prescribed by law : (a) the lawfuldetention of a person after conviction by a competent court; (b) the lawful arrest or detention of a person for non-compliance with the lawful order of a court or in order to secure the fulfilment of any obligation prescribed by law ; (c) the lawful arrest or detention of a person effected for the purpose of bringing him before the competent legal authority on reasonable suspicion of having committed an offence or when it is reasonably considered necessary to prevent his committing an offence or fleeing after having done so ; (d) the detention of a minor by lawful order for the purpose of educational supervision or his lawful detention for the purpose of bringing him before the competent legal authority ; (e) the lawful detention of persons for the prevention of the spread.ing of infectious diseases, of persons of unsound mind, alcoholics or drug addicts or vagrants ; (f) the lawful arrest or detention of a person to prevent his effecting an unauthorised entry into the country or of a person against whom action is being taken with a view to deportation or extradition. 
(2) Everyone who is arrested shall be informed promptly, in a language which he understands, of the reasons for his arrest and of any charge against him. (3) Everyone arrested or detained in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 1 (c) of this Article shall be brought promptly before a judge or other officer authorised by law to exercise judicial power and shall be entitled to trial within a reasonable time or to release pending trial. Release may be conditioned by guarantees to appear for trial. (4) Everyone who is deprived of his liberty by arrest or detention shall be entitled to take proceedings by which the lawfulness of his detention shall be decided speedily by a court and his release ordered if the detention is not lawful. 
(5) Everyone who has been the victim of arrest or detention in contravention of the provisions of this Article shall have an enforceable right to compensation. Article 6 (1) In the determination of his civil rights and obligations or of any criminal charge against him, everyone is entitled to a fair and public hearing within a áreasonable time by an independent and impartial tribunal established by law. Judgment shall be pronounced publicly but the press and public may be excluded from all or part of the trial in the interests of morale, public order or nation.al security in a democratic society, where the interests of juveniles or the protection of the private life of the parties so require, or to the extent strictly necessary in the opinion of the court in special circumstances where publicity would prejudice the interests of justice. (2) Everyone charged with a criminal offence shall be presumed innocent until proved guilty according to law. (3) Everyone charged with a criminal offence has the following minimum rights: (a) to be informed promptly, in a language which he understands and in detail, of the nature and cause of the accusation against him; (b) to have adequate time and facilities for the preparation of his de.fence; (c) to defend himself in person or through legal assistance of his own choosing or, if he has not sufficient means to pay for legal assistance, to be given it free when the interests of justice so require ; (d) to examine or have examined witnesses against him and to obtain the attendance and examination of witnesses on his behalf under the same conditions as witnesses against him ; (e) to have the free assistance of an interpreter if he cannot understand or speak the language used in court. -5.Article 7 (1) No one shall be held guilty of any criminal offence on account of any act or omission which did not constitute a criminal offence under national or international Jaw at the time when it was committed. Nor shall a heavier penalty be imposed than the one that was applicable at the time the criminal offence was committed. (2) This Article shall not prejudice the trial and punishment of any person for any act or omission which, at the time when it was committed, was criminal according to the general principles of law recognised by civilised nations. Article 8 (1) Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life, his home and his correspondence. (2) There !!hall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others. Article 9 (1) Everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion ; this right includes freedom to change his religion or belief and freedom, either alone or in community with others and in public or private, to manifest his religion or belief, in worship, teaching, practice and observance. (2) Freedom to manifest one's religion or beliefs shall be subject only to such limitations as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society in the interests of public safety, for the protection of public order, health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others. Article 10 (1) Everyone has the right to freedom of expression. This right shall include freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart information and ideas without interference by public authority and regardless of frontiers. This Article shall not prevent States from requiring the licensing of broadcasting, television or cinema enterprises. (2) The exercise of these freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties aa are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for preventing the disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining tho authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
Article 11(1) Everyone has the right to freedom of peaceful assembly and to freedom of association with others, including the right to form and to join trade unions for the protection of his interests. (2) No restrictions shall be placed on the exercise of these rights other 'than such as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others. This Article shall not prevent the imposition of lawful restrictions on the exercise of these rights by members of the armed forces, of the police or of the administration of the State.
 Article 12 Men and women of marriageable age have the right to marry and to found a family, according to the national laws governing the exercise of this right. 
Article 13 Everyone whose rights and freedoms as set forth in this Convention are violated shall have an effective, remedy before a national authority notwithstanding that too violation has been committed by persons acting in an official capacity. Article 14 The enjoyment of the rights and freedoms set forth in this Convention shall be secured without discrimination on any ground such as sex, race, colour, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, association with a national minority, property, birth or other status.
 Article 15 (1) In time of war or other public emergency threatening the life of the nation any High Contracting Party may take measures derogating from its obligations under this Convention to the extent strictly required by the exigencies of the situation, provided that such measures are not inconsistent with its other obligations under international law. (2) No derogation from Article 2, except in respect of deaths resulting from lawful acts of War, or from Articles 3, 4 (paragraph 1) and 7 shall be made under this provision. (3) Any High Contracting Party availing itself of this right of derogation shall keep the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe fully informed of the measures which it has taken and the reasons therefor. It shall also inform the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe when such measures have ceased to operate and the provisions of the Convention are again being fully executed. Article 16 Nothing in Articles 10, 11 and 14 shall be regarded as preventing the High Contracting Parties from imposing restrictions on the political activity of aliens. Article 17 Nothing in this Convention may be interpreted as implying for any State, group or person any right to engage in any activity or perform any act aimed at the destruction of any of the rights and freedoms set forth herein or at, their limitation to a greater extent than is provided for in the convention. Article 18 The restrictions permitted under this Convention to the said rights and freedoms shall not be applied for any purpose other than those for which they have been prescribed. 
SECTION IIArticle 19 To ensure the observance of the engagements undertaken by the High Contracting Parties in the present Convention, there shall be set up : (1) A European Commission of Human Rights hereinafter referred to aa " the Commission " ; (2) A European Court of Human Rights, hereinafter referred to as " the Court ". SECTION III Article 20 The Commission shall consist of a number of members equal to that of the High Contracting Parties. No two members of the Commission may be nationals of the same State. Article 21 (1) The members of the Commission shall be elected by the Committee of Ministers by an absolute majority of votes, from a list of names drawn up by the Bureau of the Consultative Assembly; each group of the Representatives of the High Contracting Parties in the Consultative Assembly shall put forward three candidates, of whom two at least shall be its nationals. (2) As far as applicable, the same procedure shall be followed to complete the Commission in the event of other States subsequently 'becoming Parties to this Convention, and in filling casual vacancies. Article 22 (1) The members of, the Commission shall be elected for a period of six years. They may be re-elected. However, of the members elected at the first election, the terms of seven members shall expire at the end of three years. (2) The members whose terms are to expire at the end of the initial period of three years shall be chosen by lot by the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe immediately after the first election has been completed. (3) A member of the Commission elected to replace a member whose term of office has not expired shall hold office for the remainder of hie predecessor's term. (4) The members of the Commission shall hold office until replaced. After having been replaced, they shall continue to deal with such cases as they already have under consideration. Article 23 The members of the Commission shall sit on the Commission in their individual capacity. Article 24 Any High Contracting Party may refer to the Commission, through the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe, any alleged breach of the provision. of the Convention by another High Contracting Party. Article 25 (1) The Commission may receive petitions addressed to the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe from any person, non-governmental organisation or group of individuals claiming to be the victim of a violation by one of the High Contracting Parties of the rights set forth in this Convention, provided that the High Contracting Party against which the complaint has been lodged has declared that it recognises the competence of the Commission to receive such petitions. Those of the High Contracting Parties who have made su.ch a declaration undertake not to hinder in any way the effective exercise of this right. (2) Such declarations may be made for a specific period. (3). The declarations shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe who shall transmit copies thereof to the High Contracting P,µties and publish them. (4) The Commission shall only exercise the powers provided for in this Article when at least six High Contracting Parties are bound by declarations made in accordance with the preceding paragraphs. 
Article 26 The Commission may only deal with the matter after all domestic remedies have been exhausted, according to the generally recognised rules of international law, and within a period of six months from the date on which the final decision was taken. 
Article 27 (1) The Commission shall not deal with any petition submitted under Article 25 which (a) is anonymous, or (b) is substantially the same as a matter which has already been examined by the Commission or has already been submitted to another procedure of international investigation or settlement and if it contains no relevant new information. (2) The Commission shall consider inadmissible any petition submitted under Article 25 which it considers incompatible with the provisions of the present Convention, manifestly ill-founded, or an abuse of the right of petition. (3) The Commission shall reject any petition referred to it which it con.siders inadmissible under Article 26. Article 28 In the event of the Commission accepting a petition referred to it : (a) it shall, with a view to ascertaining the facts, undertake together with the representatives of the parties an examination of the petition and, if need be, an investigation, for the effective conduct of which the States concerned shall furnish all necessary facilities, after an exchange of views with the Commission; (b) it shall place itself at the disposal of the p,µties concerned with a view to securing a friendly settlement of the matter on the basis of respect for Human Rights as defined in this. Convention. Article 29 (1) The Commission shall perform the functions set out in Article 28 by means of a Sub-Commission consisting of seven members of the Commission. (2) Each of the parties concerned may appoint as members of this Sub-Commission a person of its choice. (3) The remaining members shall be chosen by lot in accordance with arrangements prescribed in the Rules of Procedure of the Comnmission. Article 30 If the Bub-Commission succeeds in effecting a friendly settlement in accordance with Article 28, it shall draw up a Report which shall be sent to the State concerned, to the Committee of Ministers and to the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe for publication. This Report shall be confined to a. brief statement of the facts and of the solution reached. Article 31 (1) If a solution is not reached, the Commission shall draw up a Report on the facts and state its opinion as to whether the facts found disclose a breach by the State concerned of its obligations under the Convention. The opinions of all the members of the Commission on this point may be stated in the Report. (2) The Report shall be transmitted to the Committee of Ministers. It shall also be transmitted to the States concerned, who shall not be at liberty to publish it. (3) In transmitting the Report to the Committee of Ministers the Commission may make such proposals as it thinks fit. Article 32 (1) If the question is not referred to the Court in accordance with Article 48 of this Convention within a period of three months from the date of the trans¥ mission of the Report to the Committee of Ministers, the Committee of Ministers shall decide by a majority of two-thirds of the members entitled to sit on the Committee whether there has been a violation of the Convention. (2) In the affirmative case the Comitee of Ministers shall prescribe a period during which the High Contracting Party concerned must take the measures required by the decision of the Committee of Ministers. (3) If the High Contracting Party concerned has not taken satis.factory measures within the áprescribed period, the Committee of Ministers shall decide by the majority provided for in paragraph (1) above what effect shall be given to its original decision and shall publish the Report. (4) The High Contracting Parties undertake to regard as binding on them any decision which the Committee of Ministers may take in application of the preceding paragraphs. -11.Article 33 The Commission shall meet in camera. Article 34 The Commission shall take its decisions by a majority of the Members present and voting ; the Sub-Commission shall take its decisions by a majority of its members. Article 35 The Commission shall meet as the circumstances require. The meetings shall be convened by the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe. Article 36 The Commission shall draw up its own rules of procedure. Article 37 The secretariat of the Commission shall be provided by the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe. SECTION IV Article 38 The European Court of Human Rights shall consist of a number of judges equal to that of the Members of the Council of Europe. No two judges may he nationals of the same State. Article 39 (1) The members of the Court shall be elected by the Consultative Assembly by a majority of the votes cast from a list of persons nominated by the Members of the Council of Europe ; each Member shall nominate three candidates, of whom two at least shall be its nationals. (2) As for as applicable, the same procedure shall be followed to complete the Court in the event of the admission of new Members of the Council of Europe, and in filling casual vacancies. (3) The candidates shall be of high moral character and must either possess the qualifications required for appointment to high judicial office or be jurisconsults of recognised competence. Article 40 (1) The members of the-Court shall be elected for a periods of nine áyears. They may be re-elected. However, of the members elected at the first election the terms Of four members shall expire at the end of three years, and the terms of four more members shall expire at the end of six years. (2) The members whose term¥ are to expire at the end of the initial periods of three and six years. shall be chosen by lot by the Secretary-General immediate.ly after the first _election has been completed. (3) A member of the Court elected to replace a member whose term of office has not expired shall hold office for the remainder of his predecessor's term. (4) The members of the Court shall hold office until replaced. After having been replaced, they shall continue to deal with such cases as they already have under consideration. 
Article 41 The Court shall elect its President and Vice-President for a period of three years. They may be re-elected. 
Article 42 The members of the Court shall receive for each day of duty a compensation to be determined by the Committee of Ministers. 
Article 43 For the consideration of each case brought before it the Court shall consist of a Chamber composed of seven judges. There shall sit as an ex officio member of the Chamber the judge who is a national of any State party concerned, or, if there is none, a person of its choice who shall sit in the capacity of judge ; the names of the other judges shall be chosen by lot by the President before the opening of the case. 
Article 44 . Only the High Contracting Parties and the Commission shall have the right to bring a case before the Court. Article 46 The jurisdiction of the Court shall extend to all cases concerning the interpretation and application of the present Convention which the High Contracting Parties or the Commission shall refer to it in accordance with Article 48. Article 46 (1) Any of the High Contracting Parties may at any time declare that it recognises as compulsory ipso facto and without special agreement the jurisdiction of the Court in all matters concerning the interpretation and application of the present Convention. (2) The declarations referred to above may be made unconditionally or on condition of reciprocity on the part of several or certain other High Contracting Parties or for a specified period. (3) These declarations shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe who shall transmit copies thereof to the High Contracting Parties. Article 47 The Court may only deal with a case after the Commission has acknowledged the failure of efforts for a friendly settlement and within the period of three months provided for in Article 32. Article 48 The following may bring a case before the Court, provided that the High Contracting Party concerned, if there is only one, or the High Contracting Par.ties concerned, if there is more than one, are subject to the compulsory juris.diction of the Court or, failing that, with the consent of the High Contracting Party concerned, if there is only one, or of the High Contracting Parties concerned if there is more than one : (a) the Commission ; (b) a High Contracting Party whose national is alleged to be a victim ; (c) a High Contracting Party which referred the case to the Com."mission; (d) a High Contracting Party against which the complaint has been lodged.
Article 49 In the event of dispute as to whether the Court has jurisdiction, the matter shall be settled by the decision of the Court. Article 50 If the Court finds that a decision or a measure taken by a legal authority or any other authority of a High Contracting Party is completely or partially in conflict with the obligations arising from the present Convention, and if the internal law of the said Party allows only partial reparation to be made for the consequences of this decision or measure, the decision of the Court shall, if necessary, afford just satisfaction to the injured party. Article 51 (1)  Reasons shall be given for the judgment of the Court. (2) If the judgment does not represent in whole or in part the unanimous opinion of the judges, any judie ahaJl be entitled to deliver a separate opinion. Article 52 The judgment of the Court shall be final. Article 53 The High Contracting. Parties undertake to abide by the decision of the Court in any caee to which they are parties. Article 54 The judgment of the Court shall be transmitted to the Committee of Ministers which shall supervise its execution. Article 55 The Court shall draw up its own rules and shall determine its own procedure. Article 56 (1) The first election of the members of the Court shall take place aft.er the declarations by the High Contraoting Parties mentioned in Article 46 have reached a total of eight. (2) No case can be brought before the Court before this election. BEOTION V Article 57 On receipt of a request from the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe any High Contracting Party shall furnish an explanation of the manner in which its internal law ensures the effective implementation of any of the provisions of this Convention. -16.Article 58 The expenses of the Commission and the Court shall be borne by the Council of Europe. Article 59 The members of the Commission and of the Court shall be entitled, during the discharge of their functions, to the privileges and immunities provided for in Article 40 of the Statute of the Council of Europe and in the agreements made thereunder. Article 60 Nothing in this Convention shall be construed as limiting or derogating from any of the human rights and fundamental freedoms which may be ensured under the laws of any High Contracting Party or under any other agreement to which it is a Party. Article 61 Nothing in this Convention shall prejudice the powers conferred on the Committee of Ministers by the Statute of the Council of Europe. Article 62 The High Contracting Parties agree that, except by special agreement, they will not avail themselves of treaties, conventions or declarations in force between them for the purpose of submitting, by way of petition, a dispute arising out of the interpretation or application of this Convention to a means of settlement other than those provided for in this Convention. Article 63 (1) Any State may at the time of its ratification or at any time thereafter declare by notification addressed to the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe that the present Convention shall extend to all or any of the territories for whose internationAl relations it is responsible. (2) The Convention shall extend to the territory or territories named in the notification as from the thirtieth day after the receipt of this notification by the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe. (3) The provisions of this Convention shall be applied in such territories with due regard, however, to local requirements. (4) Any State which has made a declaration in accordance with para.graph 1 of this Article may at any time thereafter declare on behalf of one or more of the territories to which the declaration relates that it accepts the competence  of  the Commission to .receive  petitions  from  individuals,  non. governmental  organisations  or  groups  of  individuals  in  accordance  with  Article  25 of the present  Convention.  Article 64 (1) Any State may, when signing this Convention or when depositing its instrument of ratification, make a reservation in respect of any particular provision of the Convention to the extent that any law then in force in its territory is not in conformity with the provision. Reservations of a general character shall not be permitted under this Article. (2) Any reservation made under this Article will contain a brief statement of the law concerned. Article 65 (1) A High Contracting Party may denounce the present Convention only after the expiry of five years from the date on which it became a Party to it and after six months' notice contained in a notification addressed to the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe, who shall inform the other High Contracting Parties. (2) Such a denunciation shall not have the effect of releasing the High Contracting Party concerned from its obligations under this Convention in respect of any act which, being capable of constituting a violation of such obligations, may have been performed by it before the date at which the denunciation became effective. (3) Any High Contracting Party which shall cease to be a Member of the Council of Europe shall cease to be a Party to this Convention under the same conditions. (4) The Convention may be denounced in accordance with the provisions of the preceding paragraphs in respect of any territory to which it has been declared to extend under the terms of Article 63. Article 66 (1) This Convention shall be open to the signature of the Members of the. Council of Europe. It shall be ratified. Ratifications shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe. (2) The present Convention shall come into force after the deposit oft.en instruments of ratification. (3) As regards any signatory ratifying subsequently, the Convention shall come into force at the date of the deposit of its instrument of ratification. (4) The Secretary-General of the Council of Europe shall notify all the Members of the Council of Europe of the entry into force of the Convention, the names of the High Contracting Parties who.have ratified it, and the deposit of all instruments of ratification which may be effected subsequently. -17.DONE at Rome this 4th day of November 1950 in English and French, both texts being equally authentic, in a single copy which shall remain de.posited in the archives of the Council of Europe. The Secretary-General shall transmit certified copies to each of the signatories. For the Government of the Kingdom of Belgium: Pour le Gouveruement du Royaume de Belgique : PAUL VAN ZEELAND For the Government of the Kingdom  Pour  le Gouvernement  du  Royaume  of Denmark:  de Danemark :  0.0.  MOHR  For the Government of the French Pour le Gouvernement de la Repu.Republic: blique fran ~ aise : For the Government of the German Pour le Gouvernement de la Bepu.Federal Republic : bliqne federale allemande : WALTER HALLSTEIN -18 .For the Govemment of the Icelandic Pour 'le Gouvemement de la Repu.Republic: blique iBlandaise : PETUR BENEDIKTSSON For  the  Government  of  the  Irish  Pour  le Gouvernement  de la  Repu. Republic:  blique irlaodaise :  SEAN MAcBRIDE  For the Govemment of the Italian Pour le Gouvernement de la R<lpu.Republic: blique italienne : SFORZA For  the  Government  of the  Graod  Pour  le  Gouvememeut  du  Graod. Duchy  of Luxembourg :  Duche  de Luxembourg :  JOS.  BECH  For the Government of the Kingdom Pour le Gouvemement du Royaume of the N etherlaods : d011 Pays-Bas : STIKKER For the Government of the Kingdom Pour le Gouvernement du Royaume of Norway: de Norvege: HALV ARD M. LANGE -19 .Pour le Gouvernement de la Barre :For the Government of the Saar : E. HECTOR For the Government Republic:  of the Tur kish  Pour le Gouvernement blique turque :  de  la  Repn. F. KOPRtlLtr  For the Government of the United Kingdom Northern  of Ireland :  Great  Britain ER &nd NEST  ¥  Big,wl at Ptms this 28th day of No.vember 1950. For the Government of the Kingdom of Greece: Pour le Gouveruement du Roya.ume Uni de Gr&nde-Bretagne et l&nde du Nord : DA VIER  d'Ir¥  ¥ ¥  Bigni a Pans  le  28  ,..,,,_,,,..  1950.  Pour le Gouveruement du Roya.ume de Grooe: R. RAPHAEL Pour le Gouvernement du RoyaumeFor the Government of the Kingdom de Suede:of Sweden: K. I. WESTMAN 20 .Signed at Paris this 13th day of De.Signe a Paris le 13 decembre 1957 cember 1957 For the Government of the Republic  Pour  le  Gouvernement  de  la  Repu. of Austria  blique  d'Autriche  Leopold  FIGL  Signed at Paris this 16th day of De. Signe aParis le  16 decembre  1961  cember 1961  For the Government of the Republic  Pour  le  Gouvernement  de  la  Repu. of Cyprus  ¥  blique  de Chypre  S. KYPRJANOU PROTOCOL TO THE CONVENTION FOR THE PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS AND FUNDAMENTAL FREEDOMS PROTOCOLE ADDITIONNEL A LA CONVENTION DE SAUVEGARDE DES DROITS DE L'HOMME ET DES LIBERTES FONDAMENTALES -2 .The Governments signatory hereto, being Members of the Council of Europe, Being resolved to take steps to ensure the collective enforcement of certain rights and freedoms other than those already included in Section I of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms signed at Rome on 4th November, 1950 (herein.after referred to as " the Convention "), Have agreed as follows: ARTICLE I Every natural or legal person is entitled to the peaceful enjoyment of his possessions. No one shall be deprived of his possessions except in the public interest and subject to the conditions provided for by law and by the general principles of international law. The preceding provisions shall not, however, in any way impair the right of a State to enforce such Jaws as it deems necessary to control the use of property in accordance with the general interest or to secure the payment of taxes or other contributions or penalties. ARTICLE 2 No person shall be denied the right to education.áá In the exercise of any functions which it assumes in relation to education and to teaching, the State shall respect the right of parents to ensure such education and teaching in conformity with their own religious and philo.sophical convictions. ARTICLE 3 The High Contracting Parties undertake to hold free elections at reasonable intervals by secret ballot, under conditions which will ensure the free expression of the opinion of the people in the choice of the legis.lature. -3 .ARTICLE 4 Any High Contracting Party may at the time of signature or ratification or at any time thereafter communicate to. the Secretary.General of the Council of Europe a declaration stating the extent to which it undertakes that the provisions of the present Protocol shall apply to such of the territories for the international relations of which it is respon.sible as are named therein. Any High Contracting Party which has communicated a declar.ation in virtue of the preceding paragraph may from time to time commu.nicate a further declaration modifying the terms of any former declar.ation or terminating the application of the provisions of this Protocol in respect of any territory. A declaration made in accordance with this Article shall be deemed to have been made in accordance with Paragraph (1) of Article 63 of the Convention. ARTICLE 5 As between the High Contracting Parties the provisions of Articles 1, 2, 3 and 4 of this Protocol shall be regarded as additional Articles to the Con_vention and all the provisions of the Convention shall apply accordingly. ARTICLE 6 This Protocol shall be open for signature by the Members of the Council of Europe, who are the signatories cif the Convention; it shall be ratified at the same time as or after the ratification of the Convention. It shall enter into force after the deposit of ten instruments of ratification. As regards any signatory ratifying subsequently, the_ Protocol shall enter into force at the date of the deposit of its instrument of ratification. The instruments of ratification shall be deposited with the Secre.tary-General of the Council of Europe, who will notify all Members of the names of those who have ratified. -4 .Done at Paris on the 20th day of March 1952, in English and French, both texts being equally authentic, in a single copy which shall remain deposited in the archives of the Council of Europe. The Secretary-General shall trans.mit certified copies to each of the signatory Governments. For the Government of the Kingdom of Belgium : Paul van For the Government of the Kingdom of Denmark : Fait a Paris, le 20 mars 1952, en franc;ais et en anglais, les deux textes faisant egalement foi, en un seul exemplaire qui sera depose dans les archives du Conseil de !'Europe. Le Secretaire General en communiquera copie certifiee conforme a chacun des gouverne.ments signataires. Pour le Gouvernement du Royaume de Belgique : ZEELAND Pour le Gouvernement du Royaume de Danemark : Ole BJOERN KRAFT For the Government Pour le Gouvernement of the French Republic: de la Republique fran<;aise : SCHUMAN For the Government Pour le Gouvernement de la of the German Federal Republic : Republique federale allemande ADENAUER For the Government Pour le Gouvernement of the Kingdom of Greece : du Royaume de Grece : R. RAPHAEL At the time of signature of this Protocol, the Greek Government, pursuant to Article 64 of the Con.vention, makes the following reserv.atwn relating to Article a of the Protocol : The application of the word "philosophical", which is the penultimate word of the second sentence of Article z, will, in Greece, conform with the relevant provisions of internal legislation. Au moment de la signature ~ present Protocole, le Gouverneme he/Unique, se prevalant de l'a ticle 64 de ladite Convention, fc mule la reserve suivante, porta sur l' article z du Protocole : Le n ¥ philosophique È par lequel se ~ mine le second paragraphe de l', ticle z recevt'a en Grece une app cation conforme aux dispositioni relatives de la legislation intbieu -5 .For  the  Government  of the  Ice. Pour le Gouvernement de la Repu. landic Republic :  blique islandaise :  Petur  BENEDIKTSSON  For the Government of the Irish Pour le Gouvernement de la Repu.Republic: blique irlandaise : Pr6insias Mac AOGAIN For the Government of the Italian Pour le Gouvernement de la Repu.Republic: blique italienne : Paolo Emilio TA VIANI For the Government of the Grand Pour le Gouvernement du Grand Duchy of Luxembourg : Duche de Luxembourg : Jos. BECH For the Government of the King. Pour  le  Gouvernement  du  dom of the Netherlands  :  Royaume  des Pays-Bas :  STIKKER  For the Government of the King.dom of Norway: Halvard  Pour le Royaume LANGE  Gouvernement de Norvege:  du  For the Government of the Saar :  Pour le Sarre:  Gouvernement  de  la  Johannes  HOFFMANN  -6 -94 Pour le Gouvernement duFor the Government Royaume de Suede :of the Kingdom of Sweden : Osten UNDEN Pour le Gouvernement For the Government de la Republique turque :of the Turkish Republic : F. KOPRULU For the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland : Anthony At the time of signing the present Protocol, I declare that,á in view of certain provisions of the Edu.cation Acts in force iti the U nitcd Kingdom, the principle afjirmed in the seco11d sentmce of Article z is accepted by the United Kingdom only so far as it is compatible with the provision of efjicient instruction and training, and the avoidance of u.11reaso11ablepublic expenditure. Signed at Paris this 13th day of De.cember 1957 For the Government of the Republic of Austria Pour le Gouvemement du Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bre.tagne et d'Irlande du Nord : EDEN Au moment de signer le prise,u Protocole, je declare qu'en raison de certaines dispositions des lois sur l' enseignement en vigueur au Royaume-U ni, le principe pose daiis la seconde phrase de l' article z n' est accepte que dans la mesure ou il est compatible avec l' octroi d' une instruction et d'une formation etfi.cace et n'entratne pas de dipenses publiqucs dcmesurecs. Signe a Paris le 13 dt!cembre 1957 Pour le Gouvernement de la Repu.hlique d' Autriche Leopold FIGL Signe a Paris le 16 decembre 1961Signed at Paris this 16th day of De.cember 1961 Pour le Gouvemement de la Repu.For the Government of the Republic bli que de Ch ypre of Cyprus S. KYPRIANOU1 4225 