United Nations A/RES/68/271 Distr.: General General Assembly 22 May 2014 Sixty-eighth session Agenda item 118 Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 13 May 2014 [without reference to a Main Committee (A/68/L.45)] 68/271. Scope and modalities of the comprehensive review and assessment of the progress achieved in the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases The General Assembly, Recalling the political declaration of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases,1 and in particular paragraph 65, by which it decided to hold a comprehensive review and assessment in 2014 of the progress achieved in the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases, Recognizing the continued negative impact of non-communicable diseases, including the socioeconomic and development challenges faced by all countries, in particular low- and middle-income countries, and the need for continued concerted action and a coordinated response, including monitoring of the progress at the national, regional and global levels, Mindful of the need to maintain strong national, regional and international political commitment towards the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases, Taking note of the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Director General of the World Health Organization on the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases,2 1. Decides to convene a high-level meeting to undertake the comprehensive review and assessment on 10 and 11 July 2014, consisting of an opening plenary meeting on 10 July from 10 a.m. to 11 a.m., followed by plenary meetings from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m., and two consecutive round tables on 11 July from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 p.m. to 5 p.m., followed by a closing plenary meeting from 5 p.m. to 6 p.m.; 
1 Resolution 66/2, annex. 2 A/68/650. Scope and modalities of the comprehensive review and assessment of the progress A/RES/68/271 achieved in the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases  2. Also decides that the comprehensive review and assessment shall take stock of the progress made in implementing the commitments in the political declaration of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases,1 identify and address gaps and reaffirm the political commitment in response to the challenge of non-communicable diseases; 3. Further decides that the speakers at the opening plenary meeting will be the President of the General Assembly, the Secretary-General, the Director General of the World Health Organization, the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme and a representative of civil society who will be chosen by the President of the Assembly from among non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council and in consultation with Member States;  4. Decides that the overall theme of the review will be “Taking stock of progress in implementing the political declaration of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases and scaling up multi-stakeholder and national multisectoral responses to the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases, including in the context of the post-2015 development agenda”; 5. Also decides that the organizational arrangements for the round tables will be as follows: (a) The specific themes of the round tables will be: (i) Round table 1: “Strengthening national and regional capacities, including health systems, and effective multisectoral and whole-of-government responses for the prevention and control, including monitoring, of non-communicable diseases”;  (ii) Round table 2: “Fostering and strengthening national, regional and international partnerships and cooperation in support of efforts to address non.communicable diseases”; (b) Each round table will be co-chaired at the ministerial or high official level, with the co-chairs to be appointed by the President of the General Assembly; (c) Participation in each round table will include Member States, observers and representatives of entities of the United Nations system, civil society and non.governmental organizations, academic institutions and the private sector; (d) In order to promote interactive and substantive discussions, there will be no pre-established list of speakers for the round tables; 6. Requests the President of the General Assembly to draw up a list of non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council that may participate in the high-level meeting, including the round tables; 7. Also requests the President of the General Assembly to draw up a list of representatives of other relevant non-governmental organizations, civil society organizations, academic institutions and the private sector who may participate in the round tables, taking into account the principle of transparency and the principle of equitable geographic representation, and to submit the proposed list to Member Scope and modalities of the comprehensive review and assessment of the progress achieved in the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases A/RES/68/271 States for their consideration on a non-objection basis and bring the list to the attention of the Assembly;3 8. Decides that the closing plenary meeting will comprise the presentation of summaries of the round tables and the adoption of a concise, focused, action-oriented outcome document, requests the President of the General Assembly to produce a draft text and to convene informal consultations as appropriate in order to enable sufficient consideration and agreement by Member States, and also requests the President of the Assembly to appoint, as soon as possible, two co-facilitators for the consultation process; 9. Notes the ongoing regional multi-stakeholder consultations of the World Health Organization, regional commissions and other relevant agencies and their contributions to the preparations for the high-level meeting as well as to the meeting itself; 10. Requests the President of the General Assembly to organize, no later than June 2014, in consultation with representatives of non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, civil society organizations, the private sector and academia, an informal interactive hearing with non-governmental organizations, civil society organizations, the private sector and academia to provide input to the comprehensive review and assessment;  11. Also requests the President of the General Assembly, in consultation with Member States, to finalize the organizational arrangements for the review, including the list of speakers for the plenary meetings to be held on 10 July 2014, the identification of the civil society representative to speak at the opening plenary meeting, and the assignment of participants to the round tables, taking into account the level of representation as well as equitable geographical representation. 85th plenary meeting 13 May 2014 
3 The list will include proposed as well as final names. 