United Nations Principles for Older Persons Adopted by General Assembly resolution 46/91 of 16 December 1991 The General Assembly , Appreciating the contribution that older persons make to their societies,  Recognizing that, in the Charter of the United Nations, the peoples of the United Nations declare, inter alia , their determination to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small and to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom, Noting the elaboration of those rights in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and other declarations to ensure the application of universal standards to particular groups, In pursuance of the International Plan of Action on Ageing, adopted by the World Assembly on Ageing and endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 37/51 of 3 December 1982, Appreciating the tremendous diversity in the situation of older persons, not only between countries but within countries and between individuals, which requires a variety of policy responses,  Aware that in all countries, individuals are reaching an advanced age in greater numbers and in better health than ever before, Aware of the scientific research disproving many stereotypes about inevitable and irreversible declines with age, Convinced that in a world characterized by an increasing number and proportion of older persons, opportunities must be provided for willing and capable older persons to participate in and contribute to the ongoing activities of society, Mindful that the strains on family life in both developed and developing countries require support for those providing care to frail older persons, Bearing in mind the standards already set by the International Plan of Action on Ageing and the conventions, recommendations and resolutions of the International Labour Organization, the World Health Organization and other United Nations entities, Encourages Governments to incorporate the following principles into their national programmes whenever possible:  Independence 1. Older persons should have access to adequate food, water, shelter, clothing and health care through the provision of income, family and community support and self-help. 2. Older persons should have the opportunity to work or to have access to other income-generating opportunities. 3.Older persons should be able to participate in determining when and at what pace withdrawal from the labour force takes place. 4. Older persons should have access to appropriate educational and training programmes.  5. Older persons should be able to live in environments that are safe and adaptable to personal preferences and changing capacities.  6.Older persons should be able to reside at home for as long as possible.  Participation 7. Older persons should remain integrated in society, participate actively in the formulation and implementation of policies that directly affect their well-being and share their knowledge and skills with younger generations.  8.Older persons should be able to seek and develop opportunities for service to the community and to serve as volunteers in positions appropriate to their interests and capabilities. 9. Older persons should be able to form movements or associations of older persons.  Care 10.Older persons should benefit from family and community care and protection in accordance with each society's system of cultural values.  11. Older persons should have access to health care to help them to maintain or regain the optimum level of physical, mental and emotional well-being and to prevent or delay the onset of illness.  12. Older persons should have access to social and legal services to enhance their autonomy, protection and care.  13. Older persons should be able to utilize appropriate levels of institutional care providing protection, rehabilitation and social and mental stimulation in a humane and secure environment.  14.Older persons should be able to enjoy human rights and fundamental freedoms when residing in any shelter, care or treatment facility, including full respect for their dignity, beliefs, needs and privacy and for the right to make decisions about their care and the quality of their lives.  Self-fulfilment 15.Older persons should be able to pursue opportunities for the full development of their potential.  16. Older persons should have access to the educational, cultural, spiritual and recreational resources of society.  Dignity  17.Older persons should be able to live in dignity and security and be free of exploitation and physical or mental abuse.  18.Older persons should be treated fairly regardless of age, gender, racial or ethnic background, disability or other status, and be valued independently of their economic contribution.  